This 2020 convention
is being broadcast in 240 lands.
We anticipate over 14 million individuals
will be able to enjoy
this program by this means.
Your generous donations make this possible.
Donations can be made
online at donate.jw.org.
You may be seated.
No doubt you enjoy
examining Jehovah’s creations.
What can creation teach us
about Jehovah and about finding joy?
How can we apply what we learn?
Take note of the lessons
in the upcoming six-part symposium.
Each speaker
will introduce the one to follow.
Brother Joel Dellinger,
a helper to the Service Committee,
will deliver the first talk, entitled
“Creation Proves That Jehovah
Wants Us to Rejoice
—Exquisite Flowers.”
Are you convinced
that Jehovah wants you to rejoice?
We have many reasons to believe that.
Creation is one such proof.
In the beginning, the Bible teaches
that Jehovah worked very hard
to make our home a delightful place
to live here on planet Earth.
This included his creating millions
of different species of plants and animals.
And when he finished
with all this amazing activity,
do you know what our Creator did next?
At the end of the sixth creative day,
the Bible tells us at Genesis 1:31:
“God saw everything he had made,
and look! it was very good.”
Think about that.
After working hard over perhaps
the course of thousands of years,
our Father paused, he inspected everything,
and then he rejoiced in all that he had made.
Brothers and sisters,
the beauty and wisdom in creation
proves that our heavenly Father
wants us to enjoy life on planet Earth.
In fact, he wants us to join him in rejoicing
over all that he has made.
But how can we do that?
The Bible gives us a clue at Psalm 111:2.
I invite you, please, to open your Bible
and read along with all of us—Psalm 111:2.
It says: “The works of Jehovah are great;
they are studied by all those
finding pleasure in them.”
We see clearly in the Bible
that Jehovah invites us
to look closely at the things
he has made so that we can learn from them.
And doing so is a delightful experience.
So let’s do that together.
In this symposium,
we will examine six of Jehovah’s many works
and our God-given ability to enjoy them all.
First, we’ll focus our attention
on exquisite flowers.
Then, our next speaker
will talk about one of our favorite things
—delicious food.
Next, we will discuss beautiful colors,
our well-designed bodies,
delightful sounds and,
lastly, fascinating animals.
Each talk in this series
will also teach us
Scriptural lessons from creation
that can help us rejoice in life
even now in these difficult last days.
Well, are you as ready as I am?
Let’s start by looking closely
at exquisite flowers.
In the following video,
I invite you to look
for the answers to these three questions:
First, how many species
of flowering plants are there?
Second, what practical needs
do flowers serve?
And third, how can flowers help us
when we get anxious?
Please enjoy the video.
The earth has more than 350,000 species
of flowering plants.
Flowers serve practical needs.
Flowers make pollen in order to reproduce
and nectar for creatures that spread pollen.
Pollination produces nutritious seeds,
fruits, and vegetables.
The beautiful flower we see
may look like this to a bee.
Some flowers reflect ultraviolet light
in ways that create a hard-to-miss target.
We enjoy more than
the flower’s beauty and aroma.
Yet, some plants do not need
beautiful flowers to reproduce.
Flowers, pollen,
nectar, and aromas
are costly for plants to produce.
Those resources could be used
for other purposes.
Yet, plants make flowers
in breathtaking abundance.
Jehovah generously created flowers in a way
that brings us joy
and reminds us
to trust him when we are anxious.
“Take a lesson
“from the lilies of the field,
“how they grow;
“they do not toil,
“nor do they spin;
“but . . . not even Solomon
“in all his glory
was arrayed as one of these.”
Did that video stir within you a desire
to get to know Jehovah’s creative works
even better?
Jehovah designed us
to enjoy the beauty of flowers
and their lovely fragrances.
Can you imagine trying to study
all 350,000 species of flowering plants
—admiring their beauty, smelling them,
and maybe even making a drawing
or taking a photo of each one?
You know, if you started today
and spent a little time every day
getting to know a different flower,
your study project
would take a little over 958 years.
It’s a good thing
we’re going to live forever, isn’t it?
But in addition
to seeing the beauty in flowers,
as we’ve learned in the video,
flowers play
an important role in our ecosystem.
Flowers make pollen in order to reproduce
and nectar for creatures like the bees
that spread pollen.
In turn,
pollination produces nutritious seeds,
fruits, and vegetables.
Thanks to the flowers, we have food to eat.
And how we marvel at the ingenious design
that’s evident in all things in creation!
Many people today enjoy looking at creation,
but few realize that when they do so,
they’re actually getting
a glimpse into the mind and heart
of our loving Creator, Jehovah.
Well, that’s not true of us, though
—is it?—
because we know who Jehovah is.
When we carefully observe
all of the things he has made,
we naturally think of him
and are drawn closer to him
and to his beautiful qualities.
At one point in life, the faithful man Job
was reminded by his friend Elihu
to “stop and consider carefully
the wonderful works of God.”
Do you recall how that advice helped Job?
As Job learned,
our joy increases
when we’re focused on Jehovah
and on his works instead of on ourselves.
Parents and young ones,
this is a good lesson for all of us.
Following the advice given to Job
can also draw us closer to Jehovah.
How much better that is than spending time
with much of the world’s entertainment
that is debased!
Such prepackaged entertainment
is often designed
to turn us away from Jehovah,
not draw us closer to him.
But what about spending time
observing Jehovah’s works?
Now, that’s a wholesome pastime
with a future.
Observing flowers
may also bring to our mind another lesson,
one that Jesus taught.
Please open your Bible again
to Matthew chapter 6,
and we’ll read together verses 28-30.
In the reading, look for the answer
to the following question:
How can flowers help us when we get anxious?
Let’s read Matthew 6:28-30.
Jesus said:
“Also, why are you anxious about clothing?
“Take a lesson from the lilies of the field,
how they grow;
“they do not toil, nor do they spin;
“but I tell you
that not even Solomon in all his glory
“was arrayed as one of these.
“Now if this is how God clothes
the vegetation of the field
“that is here today and tomorrow
is thrown into the oven,
will he not much rather clothe you,
you with little faith?”
How heartwarming!
Have you ever been anxious
about food and clothing?
If so, you’re not alone.
Among those listening
to Jesus on this occasion
were many poor people
who had the same natural concerns.
But Jesus encouraged them.
How so?
By reminding them
to take a lesson from the flowers.
Jesus knew what we know:
Jehovah generously created flowers in a way
that brings us joy and reminds us
to trust Him when we are anxious.
When we see how well
Jehovah takes care of all the flowers,
we’re reminded of how generous he is
and of his loving care of humans.
And like Jehovah,
when we give generously to others
and help care for their needs when it’s
“within the power of [our] hand” to do so,
we too will experience
the joy that comes from giving.
Dear ones, may we never forget
that it was Jehovah who gave us the ability
to appreciate exquisite flowers.
May doing just that bring you joy
and add to your praise of Jehovah forever.
Now Brother Ralph Walls,
who serves as a helper
to the Personnel Committee,
will present the next talk of this symposium,
“Creation Proves
That Jehovah Wants Us to Rejoice
—Delicious Food.”
Rice and beans
—you can eat them with just about anything,
and they will be delicious.
What about kimchi?
It’s a dish of fermented vegetables
with a variety of seasonings,
producing a complex taste of sour and spicy.
And jollof rice?
So flavorsome!
This is cooked in an appetizing tomato
and pepper puree
laced with chili for a zesty taste.
And at the end of a day of hard work,
how about a piece of sweet,
fruity, cool watermelon?
It’s wonderfully refreshing.
All over planet Earth,
there are a vast variety of nutritious,
delicious, and refreshing foods.
That is what God has provided.
It is just as the Bible says.
Please read along with me
at Ecclesiastes chapter 3,
verses 12 and 13:
“I have concluded
that there is nothing better
“for them than to rejoice
and to do good during their life,
“also that everyone should eat and drink
“and find enjoyment for all his hard work.
It is the gift of God.”
No doubt, you enjoy your favorite foods.
Your mouth may be watering
just from thinking about it.
As much as we enjoy eating individually,
when we share a good meal
with family and friends,
it’s a special time.
In the following video,
note how Jehovah’s provision of food
gives evidence
that he wants us to enjoy life.
Our tongue can detect five basic tastes.
They are sweet, . . .
salty, . . .
sour, . . .
bitter, . . .
and a rich, savory taste called umami.
But we enjoy not just five flavors
but possibly over 100,000.
How?
As we chew, we also smell our food.
Chewing releases aromas
that pass up into our nose
through the back of our throat.
Taste and smell then combine
to make the flavors we enjoy.
Our taste buds develop before we’re born.
As an unborn baby swallows amniotic fluid,
it may taste what its mother eats
and is more likely
to enjoy the same foods she does.
We don’t just eat to survive.
We love to eat!
It makes us happy.
And the Bible says why:
“That everyone should eat and drink
“and find enjoyment for all his hard work.
It is the gift of God.”
We are made so that we must take in
physical food regularly in order to survive.
Yet, how grateful we are that our Creator
has made eating so enjoyable.
That reflects the way of Jehovah;
fulfilling our needs creates joy not dread.
You would not find a normal individual
complaining about eating a good dinner.
No, rather, it’s enjoyable.
Now turn with me, please,
to Matthew chapter 4,
and notice another vital need we have
that relates to food
—Matthew 4:4.
It says: “It is written: ‘Man must live,
“‘not on bread alone,
but on every word
that comes from Jehovah’s mouth.’”
We need physical food
to stay alive, and we enjoy doing so.
But the same is true with spiritual food;
we need it to stay alive spiritually.
Also, just as is true with physical food,
when we partake of spiritual food,
we find true joy.
Isn’t that what Jesus said
in his introduction
to the Sermon on the Mount?
“Happy are those conscious
of their spiritual need.”
The beauty of Jehovah’s way
is that he has made the satisfying
of our spiritual need enjoyable.
Why do we say that?
Because God’s Word, the Bible,
is written in a way that is appealing to us.
In his great wisdom,
he used humans to write the Bible.
Think about it.
If, for example, he had used angels,
would they have been able to convey
the emotions and feelings
with a human touch?
Words convey
not just information but emotions,
such as fear, sorrow, and disappointment.
By allowing imperfect men
to choose the wording
for the ideas they received
through holy spirit,
God conveyed his message with warmth,
variety, and the appeal
of human emotions and feelings.
That makes his Word appealing to us humans.
In addition to that, Jehovah provides
a variety of spiritual food in abundance.
But taking in spiritual food requires effort,
just as it takes in preparing
and eating a delicious meal
—rice and beans, kimchi, and jollof rice.
Each take time and effort to prepare.
It takes effort to plant,
cultivate, and pick watermelons.
But what a joy it is to experience
the results of such efforts!
What can we do to make
the study of God’s Word more enjoyable?
When reading the Bible,
do so aloud in a lively manner.
When we do that,
we experience what Psalm 1:2 says:
“His delight is in the law of Jehovah,
and he reads His law
in an undertone day and night.”
Take time to do research and to meditate.
By being creative,
you can make personal study
and family study meaningful and satisfying.
When reading the Bible, imagine the sounds,
the sights, the smells,
and the appearance of the events.
The August 15, 2011, Watchtower said:
“It is not the intention
of the Governing Body
“to establish one format for all families.
“Since circumstances vary,
“it is appropriate
for each family head or individual
“to evaluate how this weekly occasion
can be used in the best way.”
In other words,
make family and personal worship
an enjoyable time.
It may not always be
necessary or even desirable
to use a question-and-answer method.
A relaxed atmosphere is more conducive
to a lively and stimulating discussion.
It promotes creative thinking.
We marvel at Jehovah’s love and wisdom.
Not only has he given us life
and the means to sustain it
but he has also given us the ability
to find pleasure in doing so.
Because of human rulership,
many today do not receive
adequate amounts of physical food.
But the day is near when our loving Creator
will see to it that everyone alive will have
an abundance of food and drink.
In the meantime,
may all of us discern Jehovah’s love for us
and enjoy the food and drink that we do have
—and the abundance of spiritual food.
With such perfect gifts,
we look forward to enjoying life forever.
Brother Harold Corkern,
a helper to the Publishing Committee,
will now present
the next talk of this symposium:
“Creation Proves That Jehovah Wants Us
to Rejoice—Beautiful Colors.”
One of the most precious gifts
we enjoy as humans is the gift of sight.
Sight is possible because of the way
our eyes and our brain work together.
The complexity of our eyes
and their connectivity with our brain
give strong evidence of a very wise Designer.
And that Designer
is clearly identified for us in the Bible.
Please open your Bibles
to the book of Psalms,
and we’re going to look at Psalm 94:9.
It reads this way:
“The One who made the ear, can he not hear?
The One who formed the eye,
can he not see?”
So Jehovah created the eye
and our ability to see.
And we’re very grateful for that.
But he didn’t make it
just so that we see in one color,
just so that we can move around and work
and function safely and efficiently.
He gave us the ability to see
a wide variety of colors
that enrich our lives.
We very much appreciate the brilliant colors
of butterflies, birds, fishes, and flowers.
What is your favorite color?
Is it red, blue, green?
Or you may say,
‘You’ve only given me three choices.’
That’s true.
How many color possibilities
are there that we can see?
And how do our eyes
and our brain work together
to produce this variety of colors?
And what role
does light play in this process?
These questions will be answered
in the following video.
And please take note of how all
of this wonderful design by Jehovah
reassures us that our Creator
wants us to rejoice.
What is color?
It’s how we perceive wavelengths of light.
Objects that reflect all wavelengths
of visible light appear white.
When an object reflects
only some wavelengths,
we see color.
Cells in our eye detect light
and send signals to our brain.
We have three kinds of color-sensing cells:
those that detect red,
green,
and blue.
How do we perceive other colors?
Mixing red, green, and blue light
changes the color we see.
This flower is yellow because it reflects
red and green light into our eye.
With just three kinds
of color receptors,
we can distinguish some ten million colors.
Color triggers our emotions.
Blue and green can calm us.
Red and orange can excite!
In the Bible, descriptions that include
color help us learn.
Is there any doubt
that God gave us
the gift of color for our joy?
“I put my rainbow in the cloud,
“and it will serve as a sign of the covenant
between me and the earth.”
How grateful we are that Jehovah
gave us this ability
to see a variety of colors!
And color has an impact on our emotions.
For example, the color red
—it’s a very highly visible color,
and it’s filled with energy.
Sometimes it’s associated with danger.
And red, it’s said,
can actually make us breathe faster
and even raise our blood pressure.
But on the other hand,
green is a very calming color.
It’s very tranquil,
and that’s why when we look
at a beautiful green garden
or a beautiful hillside,
why, we feel very relaxed.
Besides affecting our emotions,
Jehovah has used color in the Scriptures
to teach us Bible truths
and to help us remember them.
To illustrate,
what do you think of
when I mention the following:
a white horse, a red horse,
a black horse, a pale horse?
Well, right away your minds
went to the book of Revelation, didn’t they?
And you understand
what these four horses picture.
The white horse pictures Jesus Christ
as the enthroned King,
riding in righteous warfare;
the red horse pictures the bloody warfare
among the nations in these last days;
the black horse, stark famine;
and the pale horse
(we’re quite familiar
with these days, aren’t we?),
the pale horse pictures dreaded disease
—pandemics leading to death.
So we see how Jehovah used color
to teach us Bible truths
and to help us remember them.
There’s another way
that Jehovah has used scriptures
and color
to teach us about him.
An example of this is at Ezekiel 1:26-28,
where Jehovah gives Ezekiel
a beautiful, brilliant view of his throne.
And among all this glory,
there is a beautiful rainbow.
And what does a rainbow picture?
The rainbow denotes peacefulness,
calmness, tranquility
—indicating what?
That with all of his dynamic energy,
Jehovah is a calm, peaceful God.
And that’s very reassuring to us,
and we are endeared to him.
Now, earlier we talked
about the association of light with color.
And in the Scriptures,
Jehovah uses light to depict something
about how he increases
our understanding of Bible truths.
At Proverbs 4:18, the Bible says:
“But the path of the righteous
is like the bright morning light
that grows brighter and brighter
until full daylight.”
Now, this applies spiritually,
but we can understand it literally, can’t we?
If you’re taking
an early morning walk in the countryside
and the sun has not come up yet,
you can see things
but you’re not quite sure what you see.
And perhaps you
don’t even know what color they are.
But when the sun comes up,
well, you see clearly
what you were looking at:
a beautiful white fence, a green pasture,
and a big, stately red barn in the distance.
And now your appreciation
for your walk has been enhanced.
Well, likewise,
the Bible tells us at 2 Corinthians 4:6:
“‘Let the light shine out of darkness,’
“and he has shone on our hearts
to illuminate them
with the glorious knowledge of God.”
Jehovah provides his servants
with spiritual enlightenment,
and that helps us to understand
and deeply appreciate Bible truths even more.
And as a result, we understand them,
we’re motivated to apply them,
and this draws us closer
to our heavenly Father.
Well, how thankful we are
that Jehovah created us
with the ability to see color!
It enriches our lives, touches our emotions,
helps us to learn and remember Bible truths,
helps us to understand
our heavenly Father better.
And the light that he provides
gives us a progressive improvement
in our Bible understanding.
How thankful we are for the gift
that Jehovah has given us to see color!
It is strong evidence
that he really wants us
to enjoy life to the full.
And now let’s give our attention
to Brother Robert Luccioni,
who will now present
the next talk of this symposium:
“Creation Proves That Jehovah Wants Us
to Rejoice
—Our Well-Designed Bodies.”
Our previous parts have reminded us
that Jehovah’s creation
of flowers and food
and colors all demonstrate
that Jehovah wants us to be happy
—to be joyful.
Well, in this part, we’re going to see
that Jehovah designed our bodies
in a way that shows that he wants
us to be happy as well.
Now, Jehovah designed us
with the amazing capacity
for motion.
Humans can walk.
We can run.
We can swim.
We can dance.
In fact,
if you turn in your Bibles
to Acts 17:28,
you will see that this
is a God-given ability.
Acts 17:28:
“For by him
we have life
and move and exist.”
This word here “move”
refers to the ability
from Jehovah for us to be active.
But with that in mind,
we have two questions:
(1) Are there lessons
that we can learn
from how Jehovah designed us
that can help us to rejoice?
And (2) are there lessons
that we can learn that can help us
in our worship of Jehovah?
Well, let’s consider
those two points.
But first, let’s watch
the following video
that will help us appreciate
the marvelous way
in which we were designed.
Our bodies are designed to move.
The way we move can be complex
or precise.
It could require strength
or stamina.
Walking involves the coordination
of dozens of muscles.
Muscles are controlled
by our brain and nervous system.
They support and move our bones
and are powered by the food we eat
and the oxygen we breathe.
Every body part is a marvel of engineering.
The knee is designed
to withstand repeated impact.
Surrounding tissue cushions and aligns it.
Findings suggest that regular movement
helps prevent joint damage.
The body is a machine
that strengthens as we use it.
Movement helps us
to stay healthy and feel good.
The body is a credit to its Creator.
“For by him we have life
and move and exist.”
The makeup of the human body
proves that Jehovah wants us
not just to exist but to be happy.
But do you remember
our first question:
What lessons can we learn?
Well, there are two of them.
One, as the video highlighted,
Jehovah designed our bodies to move.
Did you note the comment,
“Movement helps us
stay healthy
and feel good”?
Research has established
that leading a physically active life
can help us to think clearly,
feel happier,
have more energy,
be more productive.
What an incredible gift
from Jehovah!
He created us to move.
And also he created us in a way
that the more we move
—the more we exercise,
we work, we do things for others—
the happier we are.
And the second point
is that Jehovah designed our bodies
with many different parts,
but it works as one unit.
Did you notice the coordination
needed just to walk?
That’s something
we take for granted.
And what about our knee?
Can you imagine if our knee did not work
in harmony with the rest of the body?
What if every time we stood up,
we weren’t sure which way it would bend.
How complicated
that would be!
But no, Jehovah created our bodies
to work as one complete unit.
And did you notice also
that the video stated
that our body
is like a machine
with many different moving parts
and that it all works together?
But a unique difference
between a machine and our body
is that our body
strengthens as we use it.
Now, you think about that.
If you go out and you
buy a car or you buy a bicycle,
you may think that’s a successful purchase
if it operates as intended.
But you would never expect
that car or bicycle
to improve and grow stronger
every time you use it.
But that’s what happens
to our body.
And that allows us to exercise,
walk, run, swim,
dance, even more.
And the more we move,
the happier we are.
What an incredible design!
How we appreciate our bodies
—this wonderful gift from Jehovah!
But remember
our second question:
Are there lessons
that we can learn from the body
that can help us to be happy
in our worship of Jehovah?
Let’s consider
those same two points again.
Remember, we said that Jehovah
designed our bodies to move.
So, what should we do?
Well, let’s look together
to 1 Corinthians 15:58
—1 Corinthians 15:58.
It says: “Therefore, my beloved brothers,
be steadfast, immovable,
“always having plenty to do
in the work of the Lord,
knowing that your labor is not in vain
in connection with the Lord.”
So, what do we need to do?
Move, stay busy, have “plenty
to do in the work of the Lord.”
And Jehovah gave us
further reason for rejoicing
by giving us
meaningful work to do.
Now, many of you dear brothers
and sisters have said
that you’ve never felt
busier than you do now.
Do you think
that’s a coincidence?
Do you think it’s a coincidence
that the darker
and more depressing
these last days have become
that you are busier
than ever in Jehovah’s work?
No.
See, that is one of the ways
that Jehovah uses
to help us to be happy and healthy
in these last days.
Now, we know
that our primary work
is that of preaching
the good news of the Kingdom.
And we do that
through the house-to-house preaching work.
We do that through public witnessing
and through Bible studies.
But even when this work
is restricted because of world events,
we still find ways to preach.
And when we
have “plenty to do
in the work of the Lord”
(in the preaching work),
we’re happy and we’re better able
to put our troubles into perspective.
Now, others of you support
the Kingdom work by serving at Bethel
or by constructing and renovating
theocratic facilities.
Others of you share in relief work
or whatever you do;
it brings joy,
and it brings glory to Jehovah.
So here’s a question:
Are you staying
as busy as you can
and your circumstances allow
in Jehovah’s work?
Continue to have “plenty
to do in the work of the Lord.”
You’ll be happy,
and you’ll never regret it.
But, now, our second point,
we also established
that Jehovah designed our body
with many parts
but to work as one unit.
Well, what lessons
do we learn from that?
Well, look over
to Ephesians 4:16
—Ephesians 4:16,
and it says: “From him all the body
is harmoniously joined together
“and made to cooperate through every joint
that gives what is needed.
“When each respective member
functions properly,
“this contributes
to the growth of the body
as it builds itself up in love.”
So, what do we
learn from this?
Stay united,
cooperate together,
function properly.
We learn that every part
of the human body
is necessary and that it
must work together.
Well, similarly,
the congregation
is made up
of many different members.
Each member, each of you
(whether young or old, strong or frail
—all of you) contributes to the whole
and the beauty of the congregation.
Each one of you is needed.
You are special to Jehovah
and your brothers and sisters.
And did you see
when the congregation
is “harmoniously joined together”
what happens?
The congregation
is built up.
Now, again,
many of you have said
that you’ve never felt
closer to each other
or Jehovah’s organization
than you do now.
Again, that’s no coincidence.
As the end draws near,
Jehovah is gathering us closer
and closer together in unity,
and those bonds among us
need to grow even stronger.
So, how much we appreciate
and how much we can learn
from the wonderful way
in which we are made!
May each of us
remember those two points:
(1) Be determined to be
as active as possible
—move in Jehovah’s service,
and (2) may each of us do
all that we can
to promote unity.
And if you do,
you will be happy
and not only will you
bring joy to yourself
but you’ll bring joy
to others as well.
But now Brother Gajus Glockentin,
a helper to the Publishing Committee,
will now present the next talk
of this symposium,
“Creation Proves That Jehovah
Wants Us to Rejoice
—Delightful Sounds.”
A well-designed body
is indeed a reason for us to rejoice.
Certain body parts
help us to perceive the world around us.
For example,
please turn with me to Proverbs 20:12.
Let us see what the Scriptures say
in connection with two sensory organs.
Here at Proverbs 20:12, we read:
“The hearing ear and the seeing eye
—Jehovah has made both of them.”
Yes, our ability
to hear and see is from Jehovah.
How grateful we are
that he has given us the senses!
They allow us to enjoy life more fully.
The ear, for example,
allows us to hear delightful sounds.
How does it make you feel
when you hear birds chirping
or the relaxing sound of a babbling brook?
And how we cherish
hearing the voice of a loved one
—maybe your mate,
your father or mother, or your child!
We also enjoy beautiful music.
Even those who cannot hear can enjoy music.
Some connect with a song’s bass notes
or its speed rather than its melody.
In the following video,
note how Jehovah created us
to enjoy a wide variety of sounds.
Our world is full of sounds.
Some are natural.
Others we create.
We can hear music before we’re born
and can develop a love of music as we grow.
We can compose music,
be moved by it,
and replay it in our minds.
Musical instruments
typically combine a sound generator,
which produces tones
with a resonator,
such as wood or metal,
which adds volume.
The design resembles our own vocal organs.
But few instruments
compare to the beauty of the human voice.
Our hearing complements the voice.
We can listen to things
that draw us closer to God
and use the voice he gave us
to praise him with joy.
“Praise Jah, for Jehovah is good.
“Sing praises to his name,
for it is pleasant.”
Yes, sounds definitely enrich our life;
they make our life more enjoyable.
Does this not instill in us
the desire to praise Jehovah?
Now let us, please, open to Isaiah 30:21.
Here we see that ears and hearing
are sometimes used
in a figurative way in the Bible.
Isaiah 30:21 reads:
“And your own ears
will hear a word behind you saying,
“‘This is the way.
“Walk in it,’
in case you should go to the right
or in case you should go to the left.”
We can hear Jehovah’s figurative voice
from his Word, the Bible,
and from his guidance
through the holy spirit in the congregation.
Jehovah’s guidance is so clear
that it is as if we could hear him
speaking to us.
Let me ask you a question:
Does the sound of Jehovah’s voice
make you enjoy life?
Does it make you rejoice?
I suppose you would all answer
with a clear yes.
Jehovah’s voice is a delightful sound.
We all know how good it feels
when we apply Jehovah’s guidance
and enjoy success in life.
Let’s think again about our literal ears.
They are very sensitive,
so we need to protect them.
Certain sounds, or noise,
can even damage them.
So to protect our hearing,
we might use acoustic earmuffs
to block out harmful noise.
But what about our figurative ears?
Do we need to protect them too?
Are there sounds out there that can harm us?
Yes, there are.
The reality is that we live in a world
full of damaging and unpleasant noise.
So, then, how can we protect ourselves?
Here are three measures we need to take.
First, block out the harmful noise around us.
We can put on noise-canceling headphones.
In other words,
we refuse to listen to anything
that can distance us from Jehovah.
Like what?
Deceptive reasoning and false accusations,
for example, are very dangerous.
They undermine our trust
in Jehovah’s organization.
Some who were once part
of the Christian congregation
now attempt to mislead us.
They spread half-truths and outright lies
about Jehovah’s organization.
Harmful sounds might also come
from non-Christian workmates,
schoolmates, or contacts on social media.
They do not share our beliefs,
so conversations with them
are rarely faith-strengthening.
They might weaken our faith,
making our Christian life course
more difficult.
Therefore, we need to protect our ears
from damaging noise
by not listening to it.
What is the second way
to protect ourselves from damaging sounds?
Headphones can help us
block out the noise around us
and replace it with something delightful
—maybe a favorite song.
So put on our figurative headphones
and listen to wholesome things
—our favorite sounds,
delightful sounds from Jehovah.
This is what we hear
at our Christian meetings.
And when we sing at our Christian meetings,
like we’ve seen in the video,
our sounds praise Jehovah.
What we read in our publications,
what we see on our website,
what we hear in upbuilding conversations
with our brothers and sisters
—all of these beautiful sounds
protect our ears.
A third aid for protecting our ears
is Jehovah’s help.
Sometimes we might not feel like
putting on our headphones.
We might argue:
‘It is so much more comfortable without them.
The damage to my ears
will not be that serious.’
Now, this is where Jehovah comes into play.
He will help us listen to his voice
whenever we ask him for his help in prayer.
He will motivate us
to put on our headphones, so to speak.
He gives us the inner strength
to stop listening
to sounds that might be tempting
and yet are so dangerous.
So, what are the three ways
to protect our figurative ears?
We stop listening to damaging sounds,
we listen to wholesome things,
and we pray for Jehovah’s help.
Dear brothers and sisters,
Jehovah created sounds
because he wants us to enjoy life.
Please let us continue
to make wise use of our hearing,
and then we will rejoice
in hearing delightful sounds forever.
Brother John Ekrann,
a helper to the Coordinators’ Committee,
will now present
the last talk of this symposium:
“Creation Proves
That Jehovah Wants Us to Rejoice
—Fascinating Animals.”
What’s your favorite animal?
My favorite animal is a dolphin.
One time, I was snorkeling in the ocean,
and a pod of dolphins came by.
And, of course, with the mask on,
I could see underwater.
And it was beautiful to watch
how they could swim
—how sleek they were in the water.
Then I watched as one of them
used his powerful tail
to shoot up to the surface of the water.
I lifted my head up
and watched him jump out of the water
and gracefully go right back in.
It was a sight I won’t forget.
I’m sure that if we talked
to each of you watching this,
you could tell some really good story
about your favorite animal.
Our beautiful planet Earth
is full of animals.
Of course, though,
for many of us in modern-day life,
we don’t get a chance
to interact with animals that much.
Most of our interaction with animals
is second hand
through books or videos.
In fact, the Internet is full of videos,
especially of cats.
People share these videos.
Why?
Because it makes them smile.
They enjoy watching them.
In fact, many of you are probably thinking
of some video you just watched about animals.
Clearly, Jehovah created animals
with qualities to bring us joy,
to make us happy.
Watching them in person or in video
can cultivate our interest.
They can entertain us
and make us feel good.
We see Jehovah’s sense of humor
in how the animals interact
and play with one another.
And we can also learn lessons
from the animals.
Proverbs 6:6 is an example of that.
Proverbs 6:6:
“Go to the ant, you lazy one;
observe its ways and become wise.”
I can remember as a young boy,
I was fascinated with ants
—so many of them,
and yet they all knew what to do.
And they could carry these really big leaves
and other things for their size.
It was amazing to see what they could do
—even the building of their tunnels.
As children, many of us
were interested in animals
—fascinated with them.
However, as we got older,
we became more fascinated with technology
or things that man has made.
But really the things that man has made
cannot compare to the things
Jehovah has made,
especially the animals.
The design and wonder you feel
when you watch your favorite animal
is in a category all by itself.
Now in the following video,
we’re going to see
some really beautiful animals.
Maybe you will see your favorite animal.
Animals fascinate us.
We marvel at their speed,
their agility,
and their strength.
Their beauty and behavior
are a pleasure to watch.
Like us, they play.
Some even dance!
They are industrious.
A beaver dam can extend hundreds of meters.
Some can even be seen from space!
When we observe animals,
we learn more about the Creator.
Their instinctive wisdom reveals his wisdom.
He is caring and generous.
And he is a happy God.
Animals fascinate us
because we are made in God’s image.
We enjoy what He enjoys,
especially our earth and its amazing animals.
They are his gift to us.
“Let us make man in our image,
“according to our likeness,
“and let them have in subjection
“the fish of the sea
“and the flying creatures of the heavens
“and the domestic animals
and all the earth.”
Were you and the others with you
watching that video smiling
or maybe even laughing a little bit
when you saw the little dog
jumping back and forth?
You see, the design of animals
to bring us joy
is not an evolutionary accident.
Jehovah and Jesus, his “master worker,”
found joy in creating and designing
animal life
to delight us.
Now, can you imagine Jehovah and Jesus
discussing designing an elephant?
The elephant trunk is a nose,
it’s an arm,
it’s a showerhead,
it’s a straw,
and it can even be a snorkel.
Did you know that their feet
are so well-padded
that you can hardly hear them coming?
Imagine Jehovah and Jesus
making this huge elephant and saying,
“We’re going to make it really quiet.”
Or can you imagine what the angels thought
when they first saw a lemur dancing
or a hummingbird hovering in the air
or a little puppy chasing its tail?
Or can you imagine being Adam,
the first human being,
amongst all of these animals?
How Adam must have thrilled
to watch the animals and name them!
What would you have called an animal
with a funny hump on its back
or a bird that could mimic
the sounds you made
or a lizard that could change colors,
maybe even looking at it as it moved,
changing colors, wondering,
‘How did it do that?’
Jehovah assigned Adam
to not only name the animals
but to care for them.
Let’s read the scripture
that was highlighted in our video
at Genesis 1:26.
Genesis 1:26:
“Then God said:
‘Let us make man in our image,
“‘according to our likeness,
“‘and let them have in subjection
the fish of the sea
“‘and the flying creatures of the heavens
“‘and the domestic animals
and all the earth
and every creeping animal
that is moving on the earth.’”
Yes, Jehovah God wanted Adam
and his descendants
—that’s us—
to take care of the animals
and to take delight in them.
If we take time to enjoy animal life,
we can make
some very fascinating discoveries.
Did you see in the video
the lemurs of Madagascar?
Do you know
how many varieties of lemurs there are?
Do you know what lemurs eat?
Have you ever seen lemurs play?
I have.
And I guarantee you,
you will enjoy it and smile when you do.
I made one discovery about dolphins.
Dolphins can blow under water
a perfect circle of air,
and then they like to play with it afterward.
The first time I saw that video,
I could hardly believe my eyes.
Friends, today we can only imagine
what it will be like in the future Paradise
when we can really enjoy animal life
the way Jehovah truly intended.
In review, this symposium
has been about Jehovah’s creative works
—exquisite flowers,
delicious food,
beautiful colors,
our well-designed bodies,
delightful sounds,
and fascinating animals
—all of which convince us
that Jehovah wants us to enjoy life.
At a time when many people
are not finding meaning or joy
in the things that man has made,
observe and rejoice in the gift of the things
that Jehovah has made
and given to us.
Make them a source of true joy in your life.
Thank you, brothers, for sharing those
thought-provoking lessons from creation.
Our Christian brothers and sisters
also bring us great joy.
How can we safeguard and strengthen
our relationships with them?
Brother Stephen Lett of the Governing Body
will direct us to the Bible’s wise counsel.
His theme is
“‘Those Who Promote Peace Have Joy’—Why?”
Ravens brought Elijah bread
and meat morning and evening.
Jesus transformed
a hundred gallons of water
into very fine wine.
A hundred and twenty Christians
suddenly could speak
different languages.
What did those three events
have in common?
They were all three miracles
produced by holy spirit.
But miracles
are no longer happening today.
Is that right?
Not really, if you think about it.
If we think about it,
the peace, the love,
the harmony of Jehovah’s people
in a world that is so divided
is a modern-day miracle.
In contrast,
Satan’s world around us
is becoming more divided by race,
ethnicity, religion,
political affiliation, and so forth.
But Jehovah’s people
are more united than ever.
And when we attend
our assemblies and conventions,
we especially see this.
We see different races
and nationalities enjoying
a genuinely peaceful,
joyful gathering.
In fact, looking at a world map,
Sister Lett and I were able to calculate
that during the past 20 years,
we’ve attended assemblies,
conventions, large gatherings
in at least 82 different countries;
and every one of them
overflowed with love and joy;
convinced us even more
that these are Jehovah’s people
—people he’s gathered from all nations,
tribes, peoples, and tongues
into his organization
and is preparing for the new world.
But now we ask,
What makes this modern-day miracle possible?
The answer is,
it stems from a peaceful relationship
that we have with our Father, Jehovah,
who was called
at 1 Thessalonians 5:23,
“the God of peace.”
As his children,
we strive to imitate him.
We’re all brothers and sisters
—we have the same father—
so we are ones who show peace
and love like our Father.
But here’s another question:
Is maintaining this peace
and harmony automatic?
Well, is maintaining a garden,
an automobile, our health automatic?
No, it takes effort,
doesn’t it?
We’re all imperfect, so we have to work
at maintaining peace every day.
That’s the thought if you go
to 1 Peter chapter 3, please.
It does take effort.
First Peter 3:10:
“For ‘whoever would love life
and see good days
“‘must guard his tongue from bad
“‘and his lips from speaking deception.
“‘Let him turn away
from what is bad and do what is good;
“‘[now notice] let him seek
peace and pursue it.’”
So notice, effort is needed
to turn from bad and do good.
“Seek peace and pursue it”
—two action verbs.
If you want to illustrate that,
think of a policeman
seeking, pursuing, a criminal.
The criminal is trying
to get away, isn’t he?
Well, peace tries to get away
from us because of imperfection,
but we have to pursue it.
Interestingly, the Bible links
peace to happiness.
Proverbs 12:20,
the theme scripture for this talk, says:
“Those who promote peace have joy.”
Matthew 5:9:
“Happy are the peacemakers,
since they will be called sons of God.”
Now, it didn’t say,
“Happy are the peaceful.”
That’s just tranquil, passive
—even a dead body is peaceful.
No, “happy are the peacemakers.”
A peacemaker
actively promotes peace.
He makes peace
where it previously was lacking.
If you think about cows,
they make milk;
bees make honey;
a cheesemaker makes cheese;
a peacemaker makes peace.
Maybe it’s been lost;
it’s been disturbed;
but he has skill in restoring it and,
of course, a peacemaker
avoids doing anything that would disturb
the peace in the first place.
He works very hard
to create an environment
where peace can prevail.
But now that leads us into the discussion
about how peacemakers
avoid the two peace destroyers:
jealousy and contentiousness.
Now, these two peace disturbers
are identified
in James chapter 3.
Let’s go there, please.
In James chapter 3,
let’s read together
verses 14 and 15:
“But if you have bitter jealousy
“and contentiousness in your hearts,
“do not be bragging
and lying against the truth.
“This is not the wisdom
that comes down from above;
it is earthly,
animalistic, demonic.”
You notice first
that jealousy is identified.
What is jealousy?
It means to resent someone
because of his possessions,
talents, or position.
Rather than be happy for him,
we resent him,
maybe even dislike him for what he has
—usually things that we don’t have.
But what makes this very serious
is that jealousy can escalate
to being envy.
Now, what is envy, and what’s the difference
between envy and jealousy?
One Biblical reference work says this:
“‘Jealousy’ . . . refers to the desire
“to be as well off as another,
“. . . [but] ‘envy’ refers
to the desire to deprive
another of what he has.”
So the envious person
not only begrudges what someone has
but he actually wants
to take it away from him.
That second peace destroyer
is contentiousness.
What does that mean?
Being disagreeable, argumentative,
competitive—a terrible quality.
It’s the product of pride
and selfish ambition.
And as we read earlier
at James 3:14, 15,
it’s certainly not part of that “wisdom
that comes down from above,”
but, rather, it is “earthly,”
characteristic of earthly humans
who are alienated from God.
It is animalistic,
characteristic of animals
who lack spirituality
and are often contentious
with each other.
It is even demonic,
characteristic of the wicked spirits
who are very proud and ambitious.
But genuine peacemakers
work very hard
to avoid
these two peace disturbers:
jealousy and contentiousness.
They neither flaunt their talents
nor do they feel threatened
if others
are more skilled preachers, teachers,
organizers, or shepherds.
They’re very happy
to be considered “a lesser one,”
as Jesus encouraged
at Luke 9:48.
Now, it’s true that a peacemaker
may desire certain privileges of service,
but he is not consumed with ambition.
He’s balanced in his approach,
as it says at 1 Timothy 3:1:
“If a man is reaching out
to be an overseer,
he is desirous of a fine work.”
But it didn’t say that he
should ambitiously “grab”
to be an overseer; he’s balanced.
We could illustrate this
by reaching out for a nice,
tasty piece of fruit on a tree.
And then think of a small boy
very aggressively grabbing for a toy,
perhaps to try to take it
away from another boy.
There’s a real difference,
isn’t there?
But now, how does
a peacemaker reach out
to qualify
for privileges of service?
Well, he just works hard
to develop Christian qualities
within himself,
and he just works hard
in behalf of Kingdom interests.
He’s guided by Galatians 6:4,
where it says:
“He will have cause for rejoicing
“in regard to himself alone,
and not in comparison
with the other person.”
Additionally, a real peacemaker
humbly waits on Jehovah
to determine when he’s qualified
to receive a certain privilege.
And Jehovah knows, doesn’t he?
I love the account about Moses,
how when he was 40 years old,
he really thought
he was qualified
—ready to lead
the Israelites out of Egypt—
but Jehovah knew
he wasn’t ready yet.
But now, after tending flocks
for 40 years in Midian,
when he was now 80 years old,
Jehovah knew
that now he was ready.
Interestingly, at this point,
Moses thought he wasn’t ready,
but Jehovah
assured him that he was.
And when a peacemaker
does receive a privilege of service,
he credits receiving it to Jehovah
and not as a personal achievement.
So to conclude this portion
of our talk about avoiding
these peace disturbers, we say,
“May we all strive
to be genuine peacemakers,
“analyzing ourselves and praying
for Jehovah’s spirit
“to help us to avoid
any tendency to be jealous,
to envy, or to be contentious
with our brothers.”
But now, let’s talk about some things
we can do personally
to promote peace and joy.
In fact, let’s talk quickly
about six things we can do.
Number one:
Cultivate humility and modesty.
Humility means to consider others
superior to ourselves.
Modesty means to be aware
of our own limitations.
Now, if we have
those two closely related qualities,
we’ll be able to apply Romans 12:3,
which says that we
should not ‘think more of ourselves
‘than it is necessary to think,
but to think
so as to have a sound mind.’
And here’s the second thing
we can do to promote joy and peace:
Appreciate and value
the good qualities
and talents of others.
Focus on their good points,
not their flaws.
And how thankful we can be
that Jehovah does that with us.
Otherwise, we’d be doomed,
wouldn’t we?
But maybe you heard
the illustration of a brother
holding up a white piece of paper
with a red spot in the middle
and asking an audience
what they see.
Well, most say
that they see a red spot.
But then he points out
that actually 99 percent
of what they’re looking at
is white paper.
But we tend to notice the spot.
Well, if we’re not careful,
that’s what we can do with our brothers
—notice that flaw
rather than all the good qualities.
But may all of us cultivate
the Jehovahlike quality
of noticing,
appreciating, and valuing
the good qualities of our brothers.
Now here’s a third thing we can do:
Never presume that fellow Christians
are trying to outdo us.
First Corinthians 13:7 says
that love “believes”
and love “hopes all things.”
So we believe (we hope)
that our brothers are doing
what they’re doing out of a good motive
—to please Jehovah,
not to outdo us.
And we remember, Jehovah
has appointed only one Judge, Jesus.
We are no judge.
We have no right
to negatively judge our brothers’ motives.
Now here’s a fourth thing we can do:
Strive to always rejoice
over our brothers’ privileges
and successes.
Romans 12:15:
“Rejoice with those who rejoice;
weep with those who weep.”
Now, which is easier?
Well, generally, it’s not so hard
to weep with someone
who’s had some tragedy.
But now, what if some really good things
happen to them
and it hasn’t happened to us?
‘I’m so happy.
I just got appointed
as a regular pioneer.’
Now, we were really hoping
to get into the pioneer work ourself,
but we haven’t been able to do it.
Are we going to really be happy
from our heart with our brother?
Well, if we love our brother
and we love Jehovah,
then we’re going to work really hard
to have that right attitude from our heart.
We will smash
any hint of jealousy;
we’ll smash it with love.
Now here’s a fifth thing we can do:
Faithfully support those
who serve in responsible positions,
such as the elders.
And obviously doing that,
supporting these ones
that are taking the lead,
definitely promotes peace
and joy in the congregation.
Here’s one more thing:
Center your life on serving Jehovah
and helping others
rather than focusing on ourselves,
maybe our feelings,
our perceived reputation.
If we focus on serving Jehovah
and helping our brothers,
we’ll truly be
peace promoters
in the congregation.
By doing those six things, we’ll prove
that we’re peacemakers
(peace promoters)
who are reflecting
the wisdom from above.
Now, that’s the thought again.
Let’s go back to James chapter 3
—that wisdom from above.
Now, that’s what
we want to reflect on.
In James chapter 3,
let’s take a look
this time at verse 13:
“Who is wise
and understanding among you?
“Let him by his fine conduct
“demonstrate works
performed with a mildness
that comes from wisdom.”
And then drop down to verse 17:
“But the wisdom
from above is first of all pure,
“then [now notice] peaceable
“[It didn’t say peaceful, passive
but peaceable—that means a peacemaker.],
“reasonable, ready to obey,
“full of mercy and good fruits,
impartial, not hypocritical.
“Moreover, the fruit
of righteousness is sown
“in peaceful conditions
for those who are making peace.”
Yes, we’re encouraged
to be a peacemaker.
When we do this,
we bring joy to ourselves
and we impart joy to others and,
most importantly,
we make Jehovah rejoice.
But now, think about this:
Once a peacemaker
doesn’t mean
always a peacemaker.
We have to keep working
at this quality.
Now, this will be well-illustrated
in the following video interview.
I got married in 2002.
Around that time,
I was appointed a ministerial servant,
and my wife and I
were serving as regular pioneers.
In 2004,
we were given the opportunity
to serve as special pioneers.
It was something that we really wanted
because we wanted to do more for Jehovah.
So when we got that assignment,
we were delighted.
The brothers in the congregation
were also very happy for us.
But everything did not go smoothly.
As time went on,
I faced some difficult situations.
The fact that I was not appointed
as an elder made me feel disappointed.
In one congregation,
two brothers who had served
as ministerial servants
for a shorter time than I had
were appointed as elders.
I felt that those brothers
did not have as much experience as I had.
I thought, ‘I am the one with the experience,
so why didn’t I get appointed?’
I started to question my own qualifications,
and this made me very sad.
After the two brothers were appointed,
I started to dislike them.
I was also angry with them,
and the anger even progressed
a little toward hatred.
It was a real challenge for me
to serve in that congregation.
Attending meetings was difficult;
I would go with a heavy heart.
I put a lot of effort
into making personal changes
—changing my attitude
and getting rid of my negative traits.
I knew that if I did nothing,
it was going to affect the worship
I gave to Jehovah
and also the relationship with my brothers.
My wife and I
could end up completely losing our joy.
In order to make things right,
I prayed intensely to Jehovah.
I spent time in deep, personal Bible study.
My wife would also find articles
about maintaining peace with the brothers
and would give them to me to read.
She even selected Kingdom songs
that dealt with maintaining peace,
and she would sing them to me.
I made a lot of changes to my attitude
and worked hard to progress
as a person whom Jehovah would approve.
I tried to view my brothers
the same way Jehovah did
and to serve him with joy.
I really wanted to give
my best to Jehovah and to the brothers.
At the same time, I did not want
those wrong thoughts
to ever come back into my heart.
The valuable lesson that I have learned
is that privileges are not most important.
Rather, it is serving Jehovah
that brings genuine happiness.
And now I am finding
real joy and satisfaction
in my service to Jehovah.
So may each of us
prayerfully work to have the attitude
of wanting
to be a peacemaker.
And when we do this,
we prove to Jehovah
we’re the kind of person
that he wants in his new world.
At Psalm 37:11,
it says of the new world:
“The meek will possess the earth,
and they will find [their] exquisite delight
in the abundance of peace.”
So the new world
will be a very peaceful place.
But if we’re a peace promoter now,
we will convince Jehovah
that we will be an asset
toward that peace of his new world.
And think about this:
In the new world, it will be natural
for perfect people to just display peace
—this beautiful aspect
of the fruitage of Jehovah’s holy spirit.
But right now,
we have to work at it, don’t we?
We have to seek peace; pursue it.
But if we’re a peace pursuer now,
we will convince Jehovah
that we will be a peace displayer
in his righteous new world,
and he’ll want us to be there.
So let’s diligently promote peace
and contribute toward the strength
and the happiness
of Jehovah’s beautiful organization
(which really is a modern-day miracle),
remembering that those
who promote peace have joy
and impart joy to others.
And they make
Jehovah’s heart rejoice,
and all that rejoicing
will last forever.
Thank you, Brother Lett, for helping us
to see how we can contribute
to peace and joy among our brotherhood.
We now come to the final talk
of today’s program.
Can we truly be joyful
in these difficult last days?
How can Jesus’ example help us to find joy?
Please give your full attention
to Brother Anthony Morris
of the Governing Body
as he presents the talk
“Close Friendship With Jehovah
Brings the Greatest Joy!”
What do you look forward to?
As one of Jehovah’s Witnesses,
you look forward to perfection.
You look forward to eternal life
in a beautiful paradise earth.
However, with all of this
wonderful future before us,
what about in the meantime?
We suffer from crime.
We suffer from natural disasters,
this pandemic we suffer from,
sickness, poverty, war,
and other calamities.
In fact, as the Scriptures
mention in Romans:
“All creation
keeps on groaning together.”
So the question comes up,
and this is something
we want you to reflect on.
It’s a thought-provoking question:
Should the rest of our days
in this wicked system of things
be defined by grief?
No!
Absolutely not.
We don’t want
the remainder of our time
to be controlled
by all the problems and the grief
that mankind is suffering.
Jehovah wants us,
even during these times,
to enjoy our lives while we wait
for the fulfillment
of his prophecies
and his promises to us
(now, we’re going to establish
that for you Scripturally),
even though hardship befalls us
before the great tribulation
and during the great tribulation.
Notice this Scriptural counsel found
in the Bible book of Habakkuk.
Habakkuk chapter 3,
and we’re going to read
verses 17 and 18:
“Although the fig tree may not blossom,
“and there may be no fruit on the vines;
“although the olive crop may fail,
“and the fields may produce no food;
“although the flock
may disappear from the pen,
“and there may be no cattle in the stalls;
“[dire circumstances
—don’t you agree?—but notice verse 18]
“yet, as for me,
“I will exalt in Jehovah;
I will be joyful
in the God of my salvation.”
Even during these dire circumstances,
he was able to say
(with all of this going on):
“As for me, I will exalt in Jehovah.”
And not, “I hope I can,”
but “I will exult in Jehovah;
I will be joyful
in the God of my salvation.”
So it’s, really, his close friendship
with Jehovah God that enables him
to still have joy.
And that’s the theme of this talk,
“Close Friendship With Jehovah
Brings the Greatest Joy!”
So while we’re waiting patiently,
Jehovah wants us to rejoice.
The world can’t understand that reasoning,
but that’s what Jehovah wants for his people
—just a wonderful promise for us to focus on.
Now, the psalmist helps us to appreciate
that this isn’t just some dream
—to have a close friendship
with the Sovereign of the universe,
the Almighty God.
No, notice here in Psalm 25.
So we’ll read that together,
Psalm 25,
and this is a Scriptural assurance.
Notice verse 14:
“Close friendship with Jehovah
belongs to those who fear him,
and he makes his covenant
known to them.”
Isn’t that beautiful?
“Close friendship with Jehovah”
—it’s possible.
It’s a reality.
He teaches us.
We’re not just dreaming when we speak
about having this close friendship
with Jehovah God.
It’s a wonderful,
wonderful reality that we enjoy.
And it brings such joy
to have this closeness with Jehovah God.
Now, what helps with this
(being able to make sure
we have this close friendship)
comes down to acquiring
the “mental disposition” of Jesus.
No one has ever been closer
to Jehovah than Jesus
—prehuman existence,
during his earthly ministry,
and upon his resurrection
—so close to Jehovah.
So for us to really capture
how we can have
a close friendship with Jehovah,
we need to learn to think
and feel like Jesus did and still does.
So when we imitate his example,
it increases our joy.
So in this talk, we’re going to discuss
two aspects of Jesus’ mental disposition.
The first aspect
is how Jesus
showed unselfish love
and how that drew him close to his Father.
He found absolute joy
in showing neighborly love
and doing good to others.
Notice this artwork here, please.
Jesus gave from his heart unselfishly.
Imagine Jesus’ feelings
when he met someone who needed help.
You see Jesus and the joy of helping others.
It’s just very evident.
And the closeness with his Father
—they could see it.
The disciples rejoiced.
What a perfect example
of being close to Jehovah!
And the result?
Joy.
So that’s what we want to keep in mind.
And Jesus set that example for us.
By being generous, Jesus taught us
to practice what he did,
practice what he preached and taught.
Notice here in Luke chapter 6,
and we learn because he lived this.
He had such freeness of speech
to make these things
clear to those who listened to him.
Luke chapter 6
—and talk about being generous!
Jesus obviously was.
But notice verse 38 of Luke chapter 6:
“Practice giving,
and people will give to you.
“They will pour into your laps
a fine measure, pressed down,
“shaken together, and overflowing.
“For with the measure
that you are measuring out,
they will measure out to you in return.”
So, a beautiful lesson here:
Be generous.
Jesus was so generous with his time
and all the things he did with his disciples.
And the lesson being:
The measure you show
in the way of being generous
—it comes in return.
So sometimes people in the world
—they have stated things.
I know I heard these things when I
first became one of Jehovah’s Witnesses:
“You people—you don’t celebrate holidays.
You’re stingy.”
Nothing could be further from the truth.
We don’t celebrate holidays
that offend our God,
the one we love and worship.
So just because we
don’t celebrate these holidays
where there’s gift-giving
doesn’t mean we’re not generous.
We’re happy to give gifts.
We enjoy giving
because that’s what Jehovah
wants us to do.
We look for opportunities to be generous.
Now, keep your Bibles here at Luke chapter 6.
We need to be patient with each other.
There are some things
we’re going to discuss here.
I need to apply the counsel,
and we’re passing this on for your benefit
(some things to think about),
and if you see an area where you’d need
to make improvement,
well, by all means, do so.
That’ll keep you close to Jehovah,
and you’ll have abundant,
great joy as a result
of applying his counsel.
Now, in verse 37
(right before verse 38)
notice: “Moreover,
“stop judging, and you
will by no means be judged;
“and stop condemning,
and you will by no means be condemned.
Keep on forgiving,
and you will be forgiven.”
So, very priceless counsel
on the need to be forgiving
—Jehovah and Jesus certainly are.
He also (you’ll notice in verse 37)
stated: “Stop judging.”
Just stop it!
He didn’t say: “Don’t judge.”
He said: “Stop judging.”
Why?
Because that’s imperfect human inclination
—to judge, to judge others.
Sometimes even in the congregation,
some can become overly critical.
They can become resentful, envious.
And envy is so destructive.
Somebody might have materialistic prosperity;
they might enjoy privileges
that you don’t have in the congregation;
others might find them very endearing,
and so envy can creep in.
And, frankly, it’s unhealthy physically
and spiritually.
And notice what I
mean by that with this proverb.
Find Proverbs, if you would, please.
And the inspired counsel
is very, very clear.
Proverbs 14 and the 30th verse:
“A calm heart gives life
to the body, [now notice]
“but jealousy
[or envy, these other things]
is rottenness to the bones.”
If your bones are rotten
and the bone is so important
(all the bones in our body)
toward good physical health,
then the same thing spiritually.
If we’re jealous,
it’s rottenness to us
in a spiritual way as well.
The thing is that Jehovah doesn’t feel
he would be wanting
this close friendship with somebody
who has this issue and doesn’t work on it,
doesn’t work to correct it.
So when we work on thinking
about some of these things,
we can actually personally increase
the joy in our congregation.
And that takes us
to another Scriptural thought
that we want to address here in this talk
about having a close friendship with Jehovah.
Notice 1 Peter chapter 4,
and you’ll remember this verse
(most of you listening),
1 Peter chapter 4,
and verse 15,
1 Peter 4:15:
“However, let none of you
suffer as a murderer
“or a thief or a wrongdoer
[now notice]
or a busybody
in other people’s matters.”
So, obviously,
murder and being a thief
—these are terrible sins
against Jehovah God.
But right after that,
he mentions “a busybody.”
Now, literally in the original language
(and this has always helped me
with this inspired thought),
“a busybody” is literally “overseer
of what is another’s.”
What does that tell you?
Well, if it’s
not your responsibility to oversee
this particular issue,
then you can keep in mind the need
to mind your own business.
The Scriptures are against busybodies.
They disturb the peace of congregations;
they interfere with the congregations
enjoying the joy.
So we refrain from imposing
our uninspired opinions on others
or debating about matters of personal choice.
Do you have some concerns?
Talk to Jehovah God about it.
But if it’s a personal concern,
don’t be a busybody.
The Scriptures are very clear.
Stay away from that
—developing this negative spirit
that could disrupt the peace
of the congregation.
Now, as you watch the following video,
notice how our sister
worked at becoming more positive
and that by doing so,
she increased her joy.
I’ve had a lifelong struggle
with a negative attitude.
My negative disposition
made me a very impatient,
sarcastic, and demanding person.
One day, out in field service,
I had insulted a partner of mine,
and the entire day was ruined.
My mother was in the car.
She was very upset with the situation.
She told me that I had a negative attitude
and that I was not allowed inside the house
until that sister forgave me.
So I asked the sister to lunch.
It was one of the most difficult
and uncomfortable situations I have been in.
I realized that I needed
to make a self-examination.
Why was I negative?
Why was I so unhappy?
It was because I stopped pioneering
and my friends continued
in their full-time service to Jehovah.
And that made me very frustrated,
to see them continue this while I was stuck.
When I acknowledged
that I had this negative attitude,
that prompted me to beg Jehovah
to help me to make changes.
The friends in the congregation who I spent
a lot of time with were not bad people.
Their imperfection
fueled my negative attitude,
and I really had to put that fire out.
Personal study was a major help,
along with my prayers to Jehovah,
to make these changes.
One of the things that I meditated on
was how Jesus acted with his disciples.
When he was hungry and he was tired,
he was still very loving and kind.
So I saw for myself
that when I was spiritually hungry,
that affected my words and my actions
toward the brothers and sisters.
The keys to maintaining
Jesus’ mental disposition are prayer,
gratitude, and contentment.
My goal is to show
a grateful attitude
for the blessings that I receive
every day and also to look
for the good in people
—to show them that I care and I love them.
And I’ve learned that the more that I
give to the friends
and to my family,
the happier that makes Jehovah,
as Acts 20:35
and Hebrews 13:16 mention.
And when Jehovah is happy,
that really makes me happy.
Very thought-provoking video,
don’t you agree?
Now, you’ll notice
what lessons she learned
(and we all benefit from it):
prayer,
gratitude, contentment
—beautiful that she could see that.
And when you have prayer
coupled with gratitude,
and then you show and display contentment,
you stay close to Jehovah.
And that brings great joy
because we applied the counsel.
Now, the second point
that we’re going to discuss in this talk is:
Using practical wisdom
increases our joy.
So we made it clear that we want
to show unselfish love as Jesus did.
Now we’re talking about practical wisdom
and how that increases our joy.
Jesus knew
how important this counsel was.
He taught his disciples
that when it comes to treasures,
‘store up treasures in heaven,
because where your treasure is,
that’s where your heart is going to be.’
So he made that very clear,
trying to help them to appreciate
living a practical, simple life.
Now, notice here in this artwork how Jesus
is showing his disciples this
and how much joy they have
applying that counsel
about keeping it simple.
Jesus knew that storing up
“treasures in heaven” brings joy.
Imagine the joy Jesus found
in sharing life’s simple pleasures
with others.
So they enjoyed their surroundings.
They are rejoicing.
Nobody is comparing
(who has a certain amount of gold).
No, this is just enjoying life
because of their close relationship
with Jehovah God.
Now, by keeping our life simple,
we trust that Jehovah
will provide for our needs.
And something I’ve said for years:
“Remember, Jehovah provides
for our needs, not our greeds.”
So if we’re content
with the needs Jehovah provides for us,
we can experience great joy.
We want to avoid distractions
that could take us away
from wholeheartedly serving
our heavenly Father
or could even start to distance us from him.
The Bible is filled with practical wisdom
about physical health,
finances, family life.
And when this counsel is applied,
it can in many cases prevent problems
or at least minimize them,
even in these difficult last days.
And the Scriptures are very clear
that when we really peer
into Jehovah’s Word
(and it’s been referred to
in the Bible book of James as “a mirror”),
here’s the benefit.
Now, you will remember this
in James chapter 1.
And how much we appreciate the wisdom
that is found here at James chapter 1,
and verse 25!
James 1:25: “But the one
who peers into the perfect law
“that belongs to freedom
and continues in it
“has become, not a forgetful hearer,
but a doer of the work;
and he will be happy in what he does.”
So when we take the time
to look into Jehovah’s Word
—“peer” in—
it’s not just a glance.
We’re peering “into the perfect law,”
but then we ‘continue in it.’
We don’t read it and say,
“Oh, that was interesting”
and then go off and forget it.
No, a ‘doer of the word’
—that means there’s application
of what we just read.
And the result?
We “will be happy”—guaranteed!
That’s what Jehovah promises.
But it has to be applied
to have this benefit.
Now, there’s a beautiful proverb.
And this is personal for all of us too.
I need to apply it,
just like all of you listening.
I need to do likewise
—Proverbs chapter 15.
And this can happen
especially in these critical last days
that are coming and continuing
to get worse and worse.
But I’ve always loved this proverb,
and it’s helped me for decades,
and I think many of you
would agree that it’s helped you.
And if not, then benefit
from the wisdom here at Proverbs 15,
and let’s read verse 15:
“All the days of the afflicted one are bad,
“but the one with a cheerful heart
has a continual feast.”
Now, we need to let that sink in.
“All the days”—so this means
day after day with this negative attitude
(“poor me, poor me,
one affliction after the other”)
like the sister
in the video we saw earlier,
just absorbed with negative things.
But then it’s contrasted
with having “a cheerful heart,”
and that’s like having a feast.
So mentally and emotionally,
we’re going to benefit
from not needlessly focusing
on the afflictions
and the things that we deal with.
That connects with what we
earlier talked about: prayer, gratitude,
and contentment.
So, agonizing over problems
that are beyond our control
does not please God.
We do the best we can
with our circumstances.
But to be daily afflicted
and agonizing over these things
that we really have no control over
—we do the best we can
to resolve our problems.
Try to focus on the more productive things.
What can we do?
What are the positive things?
And this isn’t just
some psychological endeavor.
This is Scriptural direction
—Scriptural advice—
and when applied, it really works.
Jehovah blesses our efforts.
If you think about it
(and especially as I’m older now,
I can relate to it),
some of you older ones,
just keep in mind
that just because you’re tired
doesn’t mean
you don’t love Jehovah,
that you’re not close to him.
Things have changed.
So keep your close friendship with him,
and don’t dwell on the afflictions
of being elderly.
It’s not healthy spiritually or physically.
Jehovah will help us
to get through these times.
Now, what will help too
is to take the thinking down another path,
and there’s a psalm here
that I want to share with you
—Psalm 77.
So if you’ll find Psalm 77,
and this is some more beautiful,
inspired advice
—Psalm 77—
here in the 12th verse:
“And I will meditate on all your activity
and ponder over your dealings.”
Again, it’s another one of those verses
where we need to pause
and think about it,
talking about the times we’re living in.
So we must ‘meditate on Jehovah’s activity’;
we’ll come back to that in a moment.
But “ponder over your dealings”
—what would that maybe mean?
Well, Jehovah—how does he deal
with his servants?
How does he deal with us?
He’s kind.
And don’t you love being around somebody
that’s reasonable and kind?
The way they deal
with others—they’re kind.
Well, when they’re that way,
they’re really imitating
how close they are to Jehovah,
because he’s kind
when he deals with us
—and we’re so grateful for that!
And talking about ‘meditating
on the activity,’
well, think about creation
and what Jehovah has done with creation.
People who accept evolution
—they couldn’t do such.
They couldn’t find any benefit from creation
because they don’t believe in creation.
‘All of this just happened.’
Not so for us when we
look at creation
—something as simple as
(this does make Jehovah
happy when we do it)
a beautiful flower or a bouquet of flowers.
You know, sometimes the world—
They start these businesses,
and they have these fake flowers,
and some of them look pretty good.
But compare it to a real flower.
I’ve seen some make these roses
that look pretty good,
but I don’t smell
what I smell with a real rose.
The whole thing with a beautiful rose
is it just makes you reflect on the Creator.
And something that has always
been a treasure for me
is that when you can capture
a beautiful sunset
—might be a sunrise
or might be a sunset—
it just causes people
to go “Wow!”
And some of them stop
and think about God.
Whether they believe in him
or not, it just stuns them.
And shortly after we had moved here
to headquarters in Warwick, I remember
just a few days after being here,
we had some rain and such.
But then when I took a picture of it,
it had a beautiful rainbow.
I took a picture of it with my tablet.
How can you not feel good and refreshed
by looking at such activity of Jehovah God?
A beautiful, beautiful rainbow.
And then there are the antics of animals.
I love dogs.
I love puppies and kittens
and the things they do.
And sometimes they’re able
to capture them on video.
It just causes joy in the heart.
So find joy more in all of the creation
of the animals.
But most of all, find joy
in your relationship with Jehovah God.
Now, with that in mind,
notice how our brother
uses practical wisdom
in the following video.
I had a stable job at a local resort,
but I later lost this job.
I tried to look for work,
but I was unsuccessful.
My savings ran out.
We had run out of money
to buy gas for cooking.
It felt like my world had ended.
I did some research in the publications.
I found that I was able to follow the example
of some brothers who had found
that they were able to start businesses
using the skills and abilities that they had.
I was able to use a fishing net that I owned,
go down to the sea (to the river),
and put the net out in the evening.
Early in the morning,
I would go down
and be able to find fish
and crabs in the net.
It was not easy.
I did not always get
a good catch, but by doing this,
eventually I was able
to support my family during that time.
We had to cook outside on a fire.
I thought about how I could help
my family to stay positive.
We would sit together, and we
would sing Kingdom songs
and play games together.
And I feel that Jehovah
blessed the efforts that I made.
Hebrews 13:5
—that scripture reassured me
that as long as I didn’t compromise
the important aspects of Jehovah’s worship,
my family’s needs would be cared for.
I’ve always admired the beauty
and power of the sea.
It reminds me of the One
who created the sea.
It’s not hard for him to care
for just one small human like me.
What nice application of the counsel
to have practical wisdom and of the benefits!
Now, I encourage you to keep in mind
what we’ve discussed here:
showing the neighborly love
that Jesus showed
and the joy he experienced from that
and then using the practical wisdom
that Jesus taught us about
so that we stay close to Jehovah
and not get distracted with things
that the world is absorbed with.
Now, to help us completely capture
this mental inclination of Jesus
especially in the days ahead,
we want you to find Hebrews chapter 12.
And many know this verse
and have benefited,
but it certainly applies to our discussion
about a close friendship
with Jehovah bringing great joy.
Hebrews chapter 12,
and you’ll notice here,
verse 2:
“. . . as we look intently
“at the Chief Agent and Perfecter
of our faith, Jesus.
“For the joy that was set before him
“he endured a torture stake,
despising shame,
and has sat down
at the right hand of the throne of God.”
Beautiful counsel
—and this is what we need to do:
“Look intently at the Chief Agent,”
Christ Jesus.
And when you’re looking
at something intently,
that means you’re looking away
from everything else.
You’re focused.
“Look intently” in these last days
“at the Chief Agent,” Jesus.
Now, what we learn!
Because when you think
about what he went through
—the torture stake,
as mentioned here;
that three-and-a-half-year ministry
with those hypocrites
(those religious hypocrites,
attacking him with their lies and slander);
and then those final days
of his earthly life
and especially those final hours
and then those hours on the torture stake
—he knew what was coming, the details.
How does a man deal with that
without collapsing?
Well, we’re not left to wonder.
“For the joy that was set before him
he endured” all that.
So Jesus had the prehuman existence,
but the joy of sitting with his Father
again in the heavens
—oh, my!—
that got him through it.
Same for us, brothers—the joy
will get us through it,
the joy of staying close with our God.
And finally, this last verse
for this closing talk is here
in Romans chapter 12,
two sentences from this 12th verse here
—Romans 12:12—
and take this to heart:
“Rejoice in the hope.
Endure under tribulation.”
So while waiting for the fulfillment
of all of Jehovah’s promises
and the things that we have to deal with,
remember how Jesus dealt with it.
Just cling to Jehovah.
Have that close relationship with him,
and you will experience the greatest joy!
Thank you, Brother Morris,
for explaining why we find joy
in walking closely with our heavenly Father,
as Jesus did.
We have seen today that our joy
does not depend on external circumstances.
Rather, it is a God-given quality.
And Jehovah has indeed given us
many reasons to rejoice!
What can we look forward to
on the next segment of the program?
Note that the Scripture theme will be:
“Boast about his holy name.
Let the hearts
of those seeking Jehovah rejoice.”
We ‘boast about Jehovah’s name’
when we share in the ministry,
no matter what form that might take.
Throughout the next session,
we will focus on the joy of disciple-making.
And the program will help us
to become more effective disciple-makers.
Our closing song is number 28,
entitled “Gaining Jehovah’s Friendship.”
After the song,
you may have your own closing prayer.